# Liberalism
---

## Classic Liberalism
Liberalism in the 19th century was a call for increased individual rights, suffrage, and constitutionalism, however this was usually limited to just men. The primary difference from the [[Enlightenment]] was expanding voting rights to a larger group, not just the property owning middle class. Many Enlightenment thinkers believed that voting rights should only be given to educated, male, property owners; common folk were not smart or wealthy enough to make informed decisions.

Now known as classical liberals, early 19th century liberals advocated that all members of society should be in politics, and that the government should generally stay out of the individual lives and affairs of people’s property and liberty.

This was best exemplified by the English philosopher John Stuart Mill #person. Mill helped develop and incorporate utilitarianism, the idea that the greatest good is that which makes the most people happy. Mill advocated the best way to prevent the oppression of the working class was universal suffrage - a voice in government for everyone, even women 🤮, so that the multitudinous working class could institute beneficial reforms for themselves. He supported freedom of thought, voting rights, and political participation as the best way to prevent persecution. If all are involved, few will be left out and persecuted.

Additionally, in the early 19th century, Mill and most liberals advocated for [[Capitalism]] as a proper mechanism for aiding the working class and poor though aid and increasing living standards across time. By the late 19th century, however, Mill and many liberals, seeing the problems caused by [[Capitalism]] and [[Capitalism#Monopolies|monopolies]], slowly began to advocate state interventions as a necessary means for bettering society.

## Liberal Reforms
- **Reform Bill of 1832:** One of the greatest accomplishments of classical liberals was the Reform Bill of 1832, which was achieved through mass demonstration and popular support by the British working class. Due to the large [[Early Industrial Society|demographic shift]] towards city life in the early 19th century, the Reform Bill reorganized the boroughs from which members of Parliament were elected. The Bill also vastly increased the amount of constituents for seats in the [[Gentry|House of Commons]].

- **Abolitionism:** The liberalism movement also opposed the [[Age of Exploration#Treatment of Natives and Africans|slave trade system]]. Known as the Abolition Movement, Great Britain, with popular support, pioneered anti-slavery legislation by issuing pamphlets, insignia, and other propaganda material. As a result of this change in attitude and pressure on Parliament, Great Britain was the first Western nation to officially ban internal slave trade in 1807, and then enact and enforce a worldwide ban on slave trade in 1833. It is important to note that there was an even more important reason as to why Britain abolished slavery, and it has nothing to do with morality. With the [[Industrial Revolution]], cheap labor made slavery unnecessary. Furthermore, it was less costly to rent cheap labor than it was to purchase a slave; slave owners were responsible for their slaves’ lives, but with a worker, the employer was only responsible for the workers’ salaries.